README.md, before:

# spago

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.com/spacchetti/spago.svg?branch=master)][travis-spago]

*(IPA: /ˈspaɡo/)*

PureScript package manager and build tool powered by [Dhall][dhall] and
[Spacchetti][spacchetti] package-sets.


<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spacchetti/logo/master/spacchetti-icon.png" height="300px" alt="spacchetti logo">

<!-- START doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->
<!-- DON'T EDIT THIS SECTION, INSTEAD RE-RUN doctoc TO UPDATE -->


- [What does all of this mean?](#what-does-all-of-this-mean)
- [Installation](#installation)
- [Quickstart](#quickstart)
  - [Switching from `psc-package`](#switching-from-psc-package)
  - [Configuration file format](#configuration-file-format)
- [Commands](#commands)
  - [Package management](#package-management)
    - [Listing available packages](#listing-available-packages)
    - [Adding and overriding dependencies](#adding-and-overriding-dependencies)
    - [Upgrading the Package Set](#upgrading-the-package-set)
  - [Building, bundling and testing a project](#building-bundling-and-testing-a-project)
- [Can I use this with `psc-package`?](#can-i-use-this-with-psc-package)
  - [`psc-package-local-setup`](#psc-package-local-setup)
  - [`psc-package-insdhall`](#psc-package-insdhall)
- [FAQ](#faq)
    - [Hey wait we have a perfectly functional `pulp` right?](#hey-wait-we-have-a-perfectly-functional-pulp-right)
    - [I miss `bower link`!](#i-miss-bower-link)
    - [I added a new package to the `packages.dhall`, but `spago` is not installing it. Why?](#i-added-a-new-package-to-the-packagesdhall-but-spago-is-not-installing-it-why)
    - [So if I use `spago make-module` this thing will compile all my js deps in the file?](#so-if-i-use-spago-make-module-this-thing-will-compile-all-my-js-deps-in-the-file)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

## What does all of this mean?

`spago` aims to tie together the UX of developing a PureScript project.  
In this Pursuit (see what I did there) it is heavily inspired by [Rust's Cargo][cargo]
and [Haskell's Stack][stack], and builds on top of ideas from existing PureScript
infrastructure and tooling, as [`psc-package`][psc-package], [`pulp`][pulp] and
[`purp`][purp].

## Installation

> Right, so how can I get this thing?

The recommended installation methods on Linux and macOS are:
- `npm install -g purescript-spago` (see the latest releases on npm [here][spago-npm])
- Download the binary from the [latest GitHub release][spago-latest-release]
- Compile from source by cloning this repo and running `stack install`

**Note #1:** support for Windows is still basic, and we're sorry for this - the
reason is that no current maintainer runs it.  
Currently the only way to install on Windows is with `stack` - more info in
[#57](https://github.com/spacchetti/spago/issues/57).  
If you'd like to help with this that's awesome! Get in touch by commenting there
or [opening another issue][spago-issues] :)

**Note #2:** we assume you already installed the [PureScript compiler][purescript].
If not, get it with `npm install -g purescript`

## Quickstart

Let's set up a new project!

```bash
$ mkdir purescript-unicorns
$ cd purescript-unicorns
$ spago init
```

This last command will create a bunch of files:

```
.
├── packages.dhall
├── spago.dhall
├── src
│   └── Main.purs
└── test
    └── Main.purs
```

Convention note: `spago` expects your source files to be in `src/` and your
test files in `test/`.  
It is possible to include additional source paths when running some commands,
like `build`, `test` or `repl`.

Let's take a look at the two [Dhall][dhall] configuration files that `spago` requires:
- `packages.dhall`: this file is meant to contain the *totality* of the packages
  available to your project (that is, any package you might want to import).  
  In practical terms, it pulls in a [Spacchetti][spacchetti] package-set as a base,
  and you are then able to add any package that might not be in the package set,
  or override esisting ones.
- `spago.dhall`: this is your project configuration. It includes the above package-set,
  the list of your dependencies, and any other project-wide setting that `spago` will
  use for builds.

### Switching from `psc-package`

Do you have an existing `psc-package` project and want to switch to `spago`?

No problem! If you run `spago init`, we'll port your existing `psc-package.json`
configuration into a new `spago.dhall` 😎

Note: `spago` won't otherwise touch your `psc-package.json` file, so you'll have to
remove it yourself.

You'll note that most of the `psc-package` commands are the same in `spago`, so porting
your existing build is just a matter of search-and-replace most of the times.

### Configuration file format

It's indeed useful to know what's the format (or more precisely, the [Dhall][dhall]
type) of the files that `spago` expects. Let's define them in Dhall:

```haskell
-- The basic building block is a Package:
let Package =
  { dependencies : List Text  -- the list of dependencies of the Package
  , repo = Text               -- the address of the git repo the Package is at
  , version = Text            -- git tag
  }

-- The type of `packages.dhall` is a Record from a PackageName to a Package
-- We're kind of stretching Dhall syntax here when defining this, but let's
-- say that its type is something like this:
let Packages =
  { console : Package
  , effect : Package
  ...                  -- and so on, for all the packages in the package-set
  }

-- The type of the `spago.dhall` configuration is then the following:
let Config =
  { name : Text               -- the name of our project
  , dependencies : List Text  -- the list of dependencies of our app
  , packages : Packages       -- this is the type we just defined above
  }
```

## Commands

For an overview of the available commands, run:

```bash
$ spago --help
```

You will see several subcommands (e.g. `build`, `test`); you can ask for help
about them by invoking the command with `--help`, e.g.:

```bash
$ spago build --help
```

This will give a detailed view of the command, and list any command-specific
(vs global) flags.

### Package management

We initialized a project and saw how to configure dependencies and packages, the
next step is fetching its dependencies.

If we run:

```bash
$ spago install
```

..then `spago` will download all the `dependencies` listed in `spago.dhall` (and
store them in the `.spago` folder).

#### Listing available packages

It is sometimes useful to know which packages are contained in our package set 
(e.g. to see which version we're using, or to search for packages).

You can get a complete list of the packages your `packages.dhall` imports (together
with their versions and URLs) by running:

```bash
$ spago list-packages
```

#### Adding and overriding dependencies

Let's say I'm a user of the `simple-json` package. Now, let's say I stumble upon a bug
in there, but thankfully I figure how to fix it. So I clone it locally and add my fix.  
Now if I want to test this version in my current project, how can I tell `spago` to do it?

We have a `overrides` record in `packages.dhall` just for that!  
And in this case we override the `repo` key with the local path of the package.  
It might look like this:

```haskell
let overrides =
      { simple-json =
            upstream.simple-json ⫽ { repo = "../purescript-simple-json" }
      }
```

Note that if we `list-packages`, we'll see that it is now included as a local package:
```bash
$ spago list-packages
...
signal                v10.1.0   Remote "https://github.com/bodil/purescript-signal.git"
sijidou               v0.1.0    Remote "https://github.com/justinwoo/purescript-sijidou.git"
simple-json           v4.4.0    Local "../purescript-simple-json"
simple-json-generics  v0.1.0    Remote "https://github.com/justinwoo/purescript-simple-json-generics.git"
smolder               v11.0.1   Remote "https://github.com/bodil/purescript-smolder.git"
...
```

And since local packages are just included in the build, if we add it to the `dependencies` 
in `spago.dhall` and then do `spago install`, it will not be downloaded:

```
$ spago install
Installing 42 dependencies.
...
Installing "refs"
Installing "identity"
Skipping package "simple-json", using local path: "../purescript-simple-json"
Installing "control"
Installing "enums"
...
```

..but its sources will be just included in the build.

Let's now say that we test that our fix works, and we are ready to Pull Request the fix.  
So we push our fork and open the PR, but while we wait for the fix to land on the next
package-set release, we still want to use the fix in our production build.

In this case, we can just change the override to point to some branch of our fork, like this:


```haskell
let overrides =
    { simple-json =
          upstream.simple-json
       // { repo = "https://github.com/my-user/purescript-simple-json.git"
          , version = "my-branch-with-the-fix"
          }
    }
```

Note: currently support only branches and tags work as a `version`, and tags are
recommended over branches (as for example if you push new commits to a branch,
`spago` won't pick them up unless you delete the `.spago` folder).  
Commit hashes are not supported yet, but hopefully will be at some point.

If a package is not in the upstream package-set, you can add it in a similar way,
by changing the `additions` record in the `packages.dhall` file.  
E.g. if we want to add the `facebook` package:

```haskell
let additions =
  { facebook =
      mkPackage
        [ "console"
        , "aff"
        , "prelude"
        , "foreign"
        , "foreign-generic"
        , "errors"
        , "effect"
        ]
        "https://github.com/Unisay/purescript-facebook.git"
        "v0.3.0"
  }
```

The `mkPackage` function should be already included in your `packages.dhall`, and it will
expect as input a list of dependencies, the location of the package, and the tag you wish to use.

Of course this works also in the case of adding local packages. In this case you won't
care about the value of the "version" (since it won't be used), so you can put arbitrary
values in there.

And of course if the package you're adding has a `spago.dhall` file you can just import it
and pull the dependencies from there, instead of typing down the list of dependencies!

Example:

```haskell
let additions =
  { foobar =
      mkPackage
        (../foobar/spago.dhall).dependencies
        "../foobar"
        "local-fix-whatever"
  }
```

Once you verify that your application builds with the added packages, we would of
course very much love if you could pull request it to the Upstream package-set,
[spacchetti][spacchetti] ❤️🍝

#### Upgrading the Package Set

The version of the package-set you depend on is fixed in the `packages.dhall` file
(look for the `upstream` var).

You can upgrade to the latest version of Spacchetti with the `spacchetti-upgrade`
command, that will automatically find out the latest version, download it, and write
the new url and hashes in the `packages.dhall` file for you.

Running it would look something like this:

```bash
$ spago spacchetti-upgrade
Found the most recent tag for "spacchetti": 20190131
Trying to read "packages.dhall"
Package-set upgraded to latest tag "20190131"
Fetching the new one and generating hashes.. (this might take some time)
Done. Updating the local package-set file..
```

### Building, bundling and testing a project

We can build the project and its dependencies by running:

```bash
$ spago build
```

This is just a thin layer above the PureScript compiler command `purs compile`.  
The build will produce very many JavaScript files in the `output/` folder. These
are CommonJS modules, and you can just `require()` them e.g. on Node.

It's also possible to include custom source paths when building (`src` and `test` are always included):

```bash
$ spago build --path 'another_source/**/*.purs'

```

**Note**: the wrapper on the compiler is so thin that you can pass options to `purs`.
E.g. if you wish to output your files in some other place than `output/`, you can run

```bash
$ spago build -- -o myOutput/
```

Anyways, the above will create a whole lot of files, but you might want to get just a
single, executable file. You'd then use the following:

```bash
# You can specify the main module and the target file, or these defaults will be used
$ spago bundle --main Main --to index.js
Bundle succeeded and output file to index.js

# We can then run it with node:
$ node .
```

*However*, you might want to build a module that has been “dead code eliminated”
if you plan to make a single module of your PS exports, which can then be required
from JS.

Gotcha covered:

```bash
# You can specify the main module and the target file, or these defaults will be used
$ spago make-module --main Main --to index.js
Bundling first...
Bundle succeeded and output file to index.js
Make module succeeded and output file to index.js

$ node -e "console.log(require('./index).main)"
[Function]
```

More information on when you might want to use the different kinds of build can be found at
[this FAQ entry](#so-if-i-use-spago-make-module-this-thing-will-compile-all-my-js-deps-in-the-file).

You can also test your project with `spago`:

```bash
# Test.Main is the default here, but you can override it as usual
$ spago test --main Test.Main
Build succeeded.
You should add some tests.
Tests succeeded.
```

And last but not least, you can spawn a PureScript repl!  
As with the `build` and `test` commands, you can add custom source paths
to load, and pass options to the underlying `purs repl` by just putting
them after `--`.  
E.g. the following opens a repl on `localhost:3200`:

```bash
$ spago repl -- --port 3200
```

## Can I use this with `psc-package`?

Yes! Though the scope of the integration is limited to helping your
psc-package-project to use the [Spacchetti][spacchetti] package-set.

Here's what we can do about it:

### `psc-package-local-setup`

This command creates a `packages.dhall` file in your project, that points to the
most recent Spacchetti package-set, and lets you override and add arbitrary packages.  
See the Spacchetti docs about this [here][spacchetti-local-setup].

### `psc-package-insdhall`

Do the *Ins-Dhall-ation* of the local project setup: that is, generates a local
package-set for `psc-package` from your `packages.dhall`, and points your
`psc-package.json` to it.

Functionally this is equivalent to running:

```sh
NAME='local'
TARGET=.psc-package/$NAME/.set/packages.json
mkdir -p .psc-package/$NAME/.set
dhall-to-json --pretty <<< './packages.dhall' > $TARGET
echo wrote packages.json to $TARGET
```

## FAQ

#### Hey wait we have a perfectly functional `pulp` right?

Yees, however:
- `pulp` is a build tool, so you'll still have to use it with `bower` or `psc-package`.
- If you go for `bower`, you're missing out on package-sets (that is: packages versions
  that are known to be working together, saving you the headache of fitting package
  versions together all the time).
- If you use `psc-package`, you have the problem of not having the ability of overriding
  packages versions when needed, leading everyone to make their own package-set, which
  then goes unmaintained, etc.  
  Of course you can use [Spacchetti] to solve this issue, but this is exactly what
  we're doing here: integrating all the workflow in a single tool, `spago`, instead
  of having to use `pulp`, `psc-package`, `purp`, etc.

#### I miss `bower link`!

Take a look at the [section on editing the package-set](#adding-and-overriding-dependencies)
for details on how to add or replace packages with local ones.

#### I added a new package to the `packages.dhall`, but `spago` is not installing it. Why?

Adding a package to the package-set just includes it in the set of possible packages you
can depend on. However if you wish `spago` to install it you should then add it to
the `dependencies` list in your `spago.dhall`.

#### So if I use `spago make-module` this thing will compile all my js deps in the file?

No. We only take care of PureScript land. In particular, `make-module` will do the
most we can do on the PureScript side of things (dead code elimination), but will
leave the `require`s still in.  
To fill them in you should use the proper js tool of the day, at the time of
writing [ParcelJS][parcel] looks like a good option.

If you wish to see an example of a project building with `spago` + `parcel`, a simple
starting point is the [TodoMVC app with `react-basic`][todomvc].
You can see in its `package.json` that a "production build" is just
`spago build && parcel build index.html`.  
If you open its `index.js` you'll see that it does a `require('./output/Todo.App')`:
the files in `output` are generated by `spago build`, and then the `parcel` build resolves
all the `require`s and bundles all these js files in.

Though this is not the only way to include the built js - for a slimmer build or for importing
some PureScript component in another js build we might want to use the output of `make-module`.

For an example of this in a "production setting" you can take a look at [affresco][affresco].  
It is a PureScript monorepo of React-based components and apps.  
The gist of it is that the PureScript apps in the repo are built with `spago build`
(look in the `package.json` for it), but all the React components can be imported from
JS apps as well, given that proper modules are built out of the PS sources.  
This is where `spago make-module` is used: the `build-purs.rb` builds a bundle out of every
single React component in each component's folder - e.g. let's say we `make-module` from 
the `ksf-login` component and output it in the `index.js` of the component's folder; we can
then `yarn install` the single component (note it contains a `package.json`), and require it
as a separate npm package with `require('@affresco/ksf-login')`.


[spacchetti]: https://github.com/spacchetti/spacchetti
[dhall]: https://github.com/dhall-lang/dhall-lang
[travis-spago]: https://travis-ci.com/spacchetti/spago
[spacchetti-local-setup]: https://spacchetti.readthedocs.io/en/latest/local-setup.html
[cargo]: https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo
[stack]: https://github.com/commercialhaskell/stack
[psc-package]: https://github.com/purescript/psc-package
[pulp]: https://github.com/purescript-contrib/pulp
[purp]: https://github.com/justinwoo/purp
[parcel]: https://parceljs.org
[purescript]: https://github.com/purescript/purescript
[spago-npm]: https://www.npmjs.com/package/purescript-spago
[spago-latest-release]: https://github.com/spacchetti/spago/releases/latest
[spago-issues]: https://github.com/spacchetti/spacchetti-cli/issues
[affresco]: https://github.com/KSF-Media/affresco/tree/4b430b48059701a544dfb65b2ade07ef9f36328a
[todomvc]: https://github.com/f-f/purescript-react-basic-todomvc

Commit message:

Add docs on how to install packages

README.md, after:

# spago

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.com/spacchetti/spago.svg?branch=master)][travis-spago]

*(IPA: /ˈspaɡo/)*

PureScript package manager and build tool powered by [Dhall][dhall] and
[Spacchetti][spacchetti] package-sets.


<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spacchetti/logo/master/spacchetti-icon.png" height="300px" alt="spacchetti logo">

<!-- START doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->
<!-- DON'T EDIT THIS SECTION, INSTEAD RE-RUN doctoc TO UPDATE -->


- [What does all of this mean?](#what-does-all-of-this-mean)
- [Installation](#installation)
- [Quickstart](#quickstart)
  - [Switching from `psc-package`](#switching-from-psc-package)
  - [Configuration file format](#configuration-file-format)
- [Commands](#commands)
  - [Package management](#package-management)
    - [Listing available packages](#listing-available-packages)
    - [Adding and overriding dependencies](#adding-and-overriding-dependencies)
    - [Upgrading the Package Set](#upgrading-the-package-set)
  - [Building, bundling and testing a project](#building-bundling-and-testing-a-project)
- [Can I use this with `psc-package`?](#can-i-use-this-with-psc-package)
  - [`psc-package-local-setup`](#psc-package-local-setup)
  - [`psc-package-insdhall`](#psc-package-insdhall)
- [FAQ](#faq)
    - [Hey wait we have a perfectly functional `pulp` right?](#hey-wait-we-have-a-perfectly-functional-pulp-right)
    - [I miss `bower link`!](#i-miss-bower-link)
    - [I added a new package to the `packages.dhall`, but `spago` is not installing it. Why?](#i-added-a-new-package-to-the-packagesdhall-but-spago-is-not-installing-it-why)
    - [So if I use `spago make-module` this thing will compile all my js deps in the file?](#so-if-i-use-spago-make-module-this-thing-will-compile-all-my-js-deps-in-the-file)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

## What does all of this mean?

`spago` aims to tie together the UX of developing a PureScript project.  
In this Pursuit (see what I did there) it is heavily inspired by [Rust's Cargo][cargo]
and [Haskell's Stack][stack], and builds on top of ideas from existing PureScript
infrastructure and tooling, as [`psc-package`][psc-package], [`pulp`][pulp] and
[`purp`][purp].

## Installation

> Right, so how can I get this thing?

The recommended installation methods on Linux and macOS are:
- `npm install -g purescript-spago` (see the latest releases on npm [here][spago-npm])
- Download the binary from the [latest GitHub release][spago-latest-release]
- Compile from source by cloning this repo and running `stack install`

**Note #1:** support for Windows is still basic, and we're sorry for this - the
reason is that no current maintainer runs it.  
Currently the only way to install on Windows is with `stack` - more info in
[#57](https://github.com/spacchetti/spago/issues/57).  
If you'd like to help with this that's awesome! Get in touch by commenting there
or [opening another issue][spago-issues] :)

**Note #2:** we assume you already installed the [PureScript compiler][purescript].
If not, get it with `npm install -g purescript`

## Quickstart

Let's set up a new project!

```bash
$ mkdir purescript-unicorns
$ cd purescript-unicorns
$ spago init
```

This last command will create a bunch of files:

```
.
├── packages.dhall
├── spago.dhall
├── src
│   └── Main.purs
└── test
    └── Main.purs
```

Convention note: `spago` expects your source files to be in `src/` and your
test files in `test/`.  
It is possible to include additional source paths when running some commands,
like `build`, `test` or `repl`.

Let's take a look at the two [Dhall][dhall] configuration files that `spago` requires:
- `packages.dhall`: this file is meant to contain the *totality* of the packages
  available to your project (that is, any package you might want to import).  
  In practical terms, it pulls in a [Spacchetti][spacchetti] package-set as a base,
  and you are then able to add any package that might not be in the package set,
  or override esisting ones.
- `spago.dhall`: this is your project configuration. It includes the above package-set,
  the list of your dependencies, and any other project-wide setting that `spago` will
  use for builds.

### Switching from `psc-package`

Do you have an existing `psc-package` project and want to switch to `spago`?

No problem! If you run `spago init`, we'll port your existing `psc-package.json`
configuration into a new `spago.dhall` 😎

Note: `spago` won't otherwise touch your `psc-package.json` file, so you'll have to
remove it yourself.

You'll note that most of the `psc-package` commands are the same in `spago`, so porting
your existing build is just a matter of search-and-replace most of the times.

### Configuration file format

It's indeed useful to know what's the format (or more precisely, the [Dhall][dhall]
type) of the files that `spago` expects. Let's define them in Dhall:

```haskell
-- The basic building block is a Package:
let Package =
  { dependencies : List Text  -- the list of dependencies of the Package
  , repo = Text               -- the address of the git repo the Package is at
  , version = Text            -- git tag
  }

-- The type of `packages.dhall` is a Record from a PackageName to a Package
-- We're kind of stretching Dhall syntax here when defining this, but let's
-- say that its type is something like this:
let Packages =
  { console : Package
  , effect : Package
  ...                  -- and so on, for all the packages in the package-set
  }

-- The type of the `spago.dhall` configuration is then the following:
let Config =
  { name : Text               -- the name of our project
  , dependencies : List Text  -- the list of dependencies of our app
  , packages : Packages       -- this is the type we just defined above
  }
```

## Commands

For an overview of the available commands, run:

```bash
$ spago --help
```

You will see several subcommands (e.g. `build`, `test`); you can ask for help
about them by invoking the command with `--help`, e.g.:

```bash
$ spago build --help
```

This will give a detailed view of the command, and list any command-specific
(vs global) flags.

### Package management

We initialized a project and saw how to configure dependencies and packages, the
next step is fetching its dependencies.

If we run:

```bash
$ spago install
```

..then `spago` will download all the `dependencies` listed in `spago.dhall` (and
store them in the `.spago` folder).

#### Listing available packages

It is sometimes useful to know which packages are contained in our package set 
(e.g. to see which version we're using, or to search for packages).

You can get a complete list of the packages your `packages.dhall` imports (together
with their versions and URLs) by running:

```bash
$ spago list-packages
```

#### Adding a dependency

You can add dependencies from your package-set by running:

```bash
$ spago install my-new-package another-package
```

#### Adding and overriding dependencies in the Package Set

Let's say I'm a user of the `simple-json` package. Now, let's say I stumble upon a bug
in there, but thankfully I figure how to fix it. So I clone it locally and add my fix.  
Now if I want to test this version in my current project, how can I tell `spago` to do it?

We have a `overrides` record in `packages.dhall` just for that!  
And in this case we override the `repo` key with the local path of the package.  
It might look like this:

```haskell
let overrides =
      { simple-json =
            upstream.simple-json ⫽ { repo = "../purescript-simple-json" }
      }
```

Note that if we `list-packages`, we'll see that it is now included as a local package:
```bash
$ spago list-packages
...
signal                v10.1.0   Remote "https://github.com/bodil/purescript-signal.git"
sijidou               v0.1.0    Remote "https://github.com/justinwoo/purescript-sijidou.git"
simple-json           v4.4.0    Local "../purescript-simple-json"
simple-json-generics  v0.1.0    Remote "https://github.com/justinwoo/purescript-simple-json-generics.git"
smolder               v11.0.1   Remote "https://github.com/bodil/purescript-smolder.git"
...
```

And since local packages are just included in the build, if we add it to the `dependencies` 
in `spago.dhall` and then do `spago install`, it will not be downloaded:

```
$ spago install
Installing 42 dependencies.
...
Installing "refs"
Installing "identity"
Skipping package "simple-json", using local path: "../purescript-simple-json"
Installing "control"
Installing "enums"
...
```

..but its sources will be just included in the build.

Let's now say that we test that our fix works, and we are ready to Pull Request the fix.  
So we push our fork and open the PR, but while we wait for the fix to land on the next
package-set release, we still want to use the fix in our production build.

In this case, we can just change the override to point to some branch of our fork, like this:


```haskell
let overrides =
    { simple-json =
          upstream.simple-json
       // { repo = "https://github.com/my-user/purescript-simple-json.git"
          , version = "my-branch-with-the-fix"
          }
    }
```

Note: currently support only branches and tags work as a `version`, and tags are
recommended over branches (as for example if you push new commits to a branch,
`spago` won't pick them up unless you delete the `.spago` folder).  
Commit hashes are not supported yet, but hopefully will be at some point.

If a package is not in the upstream package-set, you can add it in a similar way,
by changing the `additions` record in the `packages.dhall` file.  
E.g. if we want to add the `facebook` package:

```haskell
let additions =
  { facebook =
      mkPackage
        [ "console"
        , "aff"
        , "prelude"
        , "foreign"
        , "foreign-generic"
        , "errors"
        , "effect"
        ]
        "https://github.com/Unisay/purescript-facebook.git"
        "v0.3.0"
  }
```

The `mkPackage` function should be already included in your `packages.dhall`, and it will
expect as input a list of dependencies, the location of the package, and the tag you wish to use.

Of course this works also in the case of adding local packages. In this case you won't
care about the value of the "version" (since it won't be used), so you can put arbitrary
values in there.

And of course if the package you're adding has a `spago.dhall` file you can just import it
and pull the dependencies from there, instead of typing down the list of dependencies!

Example:

```haskell
let additions =
  { foobar =
      mkPackage
        (../foobar/spago.dhall).dependencies
        "../foobar"
        "local-fix-whatever"
  }
```

Once you verify that your application builds with the added packages, we would of
course very much love if you could pull request it to the Upstream package-set,
[spacchetti][spacchetti] ❤️🍝

#### Upgrading the Package Set

The version of the package-set you depend on is fixed in the `packages.dhall` file
(look for the `upstream` var).

You can upgrade to the latest version of Spacchetti with the `spacchetti-upgrade`
command, that will automatically find out the latest version, download it, and write
the new url and hashes in the `packages.dhall` file for you.

Running it would look something like this:

```bash
$ spago spacchetti-upgrade
Found the most recent tag for "spacchetti": 20190131
Trying to read "packages.dhall"
Package-set upgraded to latest tag "20190131"
Fetching the new one and generating hashes.. (this might take some time)
Done. Updating the local package-set file..
```

### Building, bundling and testing a project

We can build the project and its dependencies by running:

```bash
$ spago build
```

This is just a thin layer above the PureScript compiler command `purs compile`.  
The build will produce very many JavaScript files in the `output/` folder. These
are CommonJS modules, and you can just `require()` them e.g. on Node.

It's also possible to include custom source paths when building (`src` and `test` are always included):

```bash
$ spago build --path 'another_source/**/*.purs'

```

**Note**: the wrapper on the compiler is so thin that you can pass options to `purs`.
E.g. if you wish to output your files in some other place than `output/`, you can run

```bash
$ spago build -- -o myOutput/
```

Anyways, the above will create a whole lot of files, but you might want to get just a
single, executable file. You'd then use the following:

```bash
# You can specify the main module and the target file, or these defaults will be used
$ spago bundle --main Main --to index.js
Bundle succeeded and output file to index.js

# We can then run it with node:
$ node .
```

*However*, you might want to build a module that has been “dead code eliminated”
if you plan to make a single module of your PS exports, which can then be required
from JS.

Gotcha covered:

```bash
# You can specify the main module and the target file, or these defaults will be used
$ spago make-module --main Main --to index.js
Bundling first...
Bundle succeeded and output file to index.js
Make module succeeded and output file to index.js

$ node -e "console.log(require('./index).main)"
[Function]
```

More information on when you might want to use the different kinds of build can be found at
[this FAQ entry](#so-if-i-use-spago-make-module-this-thing-will-compile-all-my-js-deps-in-the-file).

You can also test your project with `spago`:

```bash
# Test.Main is the default here, but you can override it as usual
$ spago test --main Test.Main
Build succeeded.
You should add some tests.
Tests succeeded.
```

And last but not least, you can spawn a PureScript repl!  
As with the `build` and `test` commands, you can add custom source paths
to load, and pass options to the underlying `purs repl` by just putting
them after `--`.  
E.g. the following opens a repl on `localhost:3200`:

```bash
$ spago repl -- --port 3200
```

## Can I use this with `psc-package`?

Yes! Though the scope of the integration is limited to helping your
psc-package-project to use the [Spacchetti][spacchetti] package-set.

Here's what we can do about it:

### `psc-package-local-setup`

This command creates a `packages.dhall` file in your project, that points to the
most recent Spacchetti package-set, and lets you override and add arbitrary packages.  
See the Spacchetti docs about this [here][spacchetti-local-setup].

### `psc-package-insdhall`

Do the *Ins-Dhall-ation* of the local project setup: that is, generates a local
package-set for `psc-package` from your `packages.dhall`, and points your
`psc-package.json` to it.

Functionally this is equivalent to running:

```sh
NAME='local'
TARGET=.psc-package/$NAME/.set/packages.json
mkdir -p .psc-package/$NAME/.set
dhall-to-json --pretty <<< './packages.dhall' > $TARGET
echo wrote packages.json to $TARGET
```

## FAQ

#### Hey wait we have a perfectly functional `pulp` right?

Yees, however:
- `pulp` is a build tool, so you'll still have to use it with `bower` or `psc-package`.
- If you go for `bower`, you're missing out on package-sets (that is: packages versions
  that are known to be working together, saving you the headache of fitting package
  versions together all the time).
- If you use `psc-package`, you have the problem of not having the ability of overriding
  packages versions when needed, leading everyone to make their own package-set, which
  then goes unmaintained, etc.  
  Of course you can use [Spacchetti] to solve this issue, but this is exactly what
  we're doing here: integrating all the workflow in a single tool, `spago`, instead
  of having to use `pulp`, `psc-package`, `purp`, etc.

#### I miss `bower link`!

Take a look at the [section on editing the package-set](#adding-and-overriding-dependencies)
for details on how to add or replace packages with local ones.

#### I added a new package to the `packages.dhall`, but `spago` is not installing it. Why?

Adding a package to the package-set just includes it in the set of possible packages you
can depend on. However if you wish `spago` to install it you should then add it to
the `dependencies` list in your `spago.dhall`.

#### So if I use `spago make-module` this thing will compile all my js deps in the file?

No. We only take care of PureScript land. In particular, `make-module` will do the
most we can do on the PureScript side of things (dead code elimination), but will
leave the `require`s still in.  
To fill them in you should use the proper js tool of the day, at the time of
writing [ParcelJS][parcel] looks like a good option.

If you wish to see an example of a project building with `spago` + `parcel`, a simple
starting point is the [TodoMVC app with `react-basic`][todomvc].
You can see in its `package.json` that a "production build" is just
`spago build && parcel build index.html`.  
If you open its `index.js` you'll see that it does a `require('./output/Todo.App')`:
the files in `output` are generated by `spago build`, and then the `parcel` build resolves
all the `require`s and bundles all these js files in.

Though this is not the only way to include the built js - for a slimmer build or for importing
some PureScript component in another js build we might want to use the output of `make-module`.

For an example of this in a "production setting" you can take a look at [affresco][affresco].  
It is a PureScript monorepo of React-based components and apps.  
The gist of it is that the PureScript apps in the repo are built with `spago build`
(look in the `package.json` for it), but all the React components can be imported from
JS apps as well, given that proper modules are built out of the PS sources.  
This is where `spago make-module` is used: the `build-purs.rb` builds a bundle out of every
single React component in each component's folder - e.g. let's say we `make-module` from 
the `ksf-login` component and output it in the `index.js` of the component's folder; we can
then `yarn install` the single component (note it contains a `package.json`), and require it
as a separate npm package with `require('@affresco/ksf-login')`.


[spacchetti]: https://github.com/spacchetti/spacchetti
[dhall]: https://github.com/dhall-lang/dhall-lang
[travis-spago]: https://travis-ci.com/spacchetti/spago
[spacchetti-local-setup]: https://spacchetti.readthedocs.io/en/latest/local-setup.html
[cargo]: https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo
[stack]: https://github.com/commercialhaskell/stack
[psc-package]: https://github.com/purescript/psc-package
[pulp]: https://github.com/purescript-contrib/pulp
[purp]: https://github.com/justinwoo/purp
[parcel]: https://parceljs.org
[purescript]: https://github.com/purescript/purescript
[spago-npm]: https://www.npmjs.com/package/purescript-spago
[spago-latest-release]: https://github.com/spacchetti/spago/releases/latest
[spago-issues]: https://github.com/spacchetti/spacchetti-cli/issues
[affresco]: https://github.com/KSF-Media/affresco/tree/4b430b48059701a544dfb65b2ade07ef9f36328a
[todomvc]: https://github.com/f-f/purescript-react-basic-todomvc
